

#Excerpts From Natural Language Processing In Mental Health Applications Using Non-Clinical Texts

*WARNING: THIS WEBSITE IS CURRENTLY A WORK IN PROGRESS. THIS PAGE CURRENTLY CONTAINS EXCERPTS FROM THE ABOVE PUBLICATION WHICH IS CITED WITH HYPERLINKS ON THE MAIN PAGE. THE CREATOR OF THIS SITE THOUGHT THE FOLLOWING EXCERPTS WOULD HELP CONVEY EXAMPLE USES OF NLP IN MENTAL HEALTH THAT PROVOKED HIM TO EXPLORE NEW APPLICATIONS. HE HOPES THAT THESE EXCERPTS, AFTER EDITING AND COMMENTS, WILL DO THE SAME FOR VISITORS. ALTHOUGH GITHUB MIGHT NOT BE THE APPROPRIATE PLATFORM FOR CONNECTING PEOPLE INTERESTED IN EXPLORING NEW IDEAS PRIOR TO CODE DEVELOPMENT, I WILL CREATE A MECHANISM FOR VISITORS TO DO JUST THAT. I'M PARTICULARLY HOPEFUL THAT VISITORS WHO SUFFER FROM MENTAL ILLNESS WILL TAKE AN INTEREST IN HELPING BRING NEW APPLICATIONS TO LIFE.

Natural language processing (NLP) techniques can be used to make inferences about peoples’ mental states from what they write on Facebook, Twitter and other social media. These inferences can then be used to create online pathways to direct people to health information and assistance and also to generate personalized interventions. Regrettably, the computational methods used to collect, process and utilize online writing data, as well as the evaluations of these techniques, are still dispersed in the literature. This paper provides a taxonomy of data sources and techniques that have been used for mental health support and intervention. Specifically, we review how social media and other data sources have been used to detect emotions and identify people who may be in need of psychological assistance; the computational techniques used in labeling and diagnosis; and finally, we discuss ways to generate and personalize mental health interventions. The overarching aim of this scoping review is to highlight areas of research where NLP has been applied in the mental health literature and to help develop a common language that draws together the fields of mental health, human-computer interaction and NLP.

NLP techniques have been identified as an important area of growth within the artificial intelligence (AI) in medicine community (Peek et al. 2015). In this paper, we discuss the potential for NLP techniques to be utilized in the mental health sector. Mental health applications are designed to support mental health and wellbeing in an online environment. These applications are reliant on interdisciplinary collaboration between researchers and practitioners from areas such as computational linguistics, human-computer interaction and mental health (and mental health service delivery). Interdisciplinary collaborations benefit from the development of a common language and body of research evidence (Calvo et al. 2016). Regrettably, there is a paucity of organized literature at this intersection between NLP, human-computer interaction and mental health research. This paper aims to help researchers in these areas envision and work toward new mental health applications. The paper is structured as follows:

Section 4 describes the techniques that researchers have applied to make inferences or generate diagnoses about the emotional state or mental health of the authors of these texts. This work draws widely upon text classification and NLP. Section 5 identifies the different types of automated interventions for supporting mental health. These range from simple canned (i.e. the same for all users) interventions to personalized interventions. Where possible, we describe the specific studies in order to evaluate the reported efficacy of these interventions.

We conclude this section with a discussion of the gaps in the literature and future opportunities in this research domain. Here, we aim to answer the following question: What Natural Language Technologies have been used with user generated data in the area of mental health?

In Data, we focus exclusively on textual data (as opposed to physiological signals, activity, etc.) that has been analyzed for mental health applications. We also focus on texts that have been written by users (e.g. mostly consumers, occasionally patients) rather than doctors or researchers. There is a significant amount of research focused on using NLP to process clinical notes, medical records and academic research papers, but they do not contribute to the focus of this review (user-generated texts) – for a review see Abbe et al. (2015)

In Intervention, we considered studies that showed ways in which NLP could be used in computer interventions to support mental health. Hypothetical uses of NLP in psycho-education are discussed but we excluded those psycho-education interventions where texts or multimedia are presented to clients without personalization or where they did not utilize NLP. Furthermore, while we have focused on mental health interventions, because of the scarcity of literature in this area, we extended the scope of the literature search to include publications from other health areas that highlight novel uses of NLP that could also be applied as a mental health intervention.

In Section 3.5, we discuss a series of studies that used suicide notes as the data source and describe how they were collected and used to train algorithms that, for example, detect real from fake ones. Other studies, such as those described in Section 3.6 have used texts written by people with mental illness seeking help and recovery, for example, personal diaries and social sharing of their problems. The benefits of writing for mental health has been recognized in the literature Chung and Pennebaker (2007), Pennebaker and Chung (2007), Pennebaker, Kiecolt-Glaser and Glaser (1988) and many people struggling with depression or anxiety write about their thoughts and experiences. Some choose to do so in online support groups and forums (described Section 3.6), making them available for researchers to analyze.

Lexical features. Emotions are often inferred by the percentage of emotional terms in the posts. These are often computed using LIWC (Pennebaker et al. 2015; Tausczik and Pennebaker. 2010). LIWC is a software tool that provides psychologically-grounded lists of positive and negative emotional terms (amongst other categories reflecting writing style). The assumption, which is supported by research evidence (Strapparava and Mihalcea 2014; Pennebaker 2011), is that emotion terms reflect emotion feelings (i.e. if you use more positive words, it is because you feel more positive). Language and feelings are indeed related, however, it appears that the relationship is weak. LIWC counts the number of words in a category (e.g. affective or social). The words are added to a category by the developers who often provide ‘validity judgments’ the correlations of judges ratings of the category with the LIWC variable. In particular, the correlation between the specific emotional words in LIWC and the emotional ratings by human ‘validity judges’ is a modest 0.41 for positive and 0.31 for negative terms; and these are amongst the lowest in the LIWC dictionaries (Pennebaker et al. 2015).

Emotion features from LIWC are often taken as good approximations of what people are feeling, thus, LIWC has been used in several mental health projects. But since the labeling is not done for clinical purposes the thesaurus does not directly indicate if, for example, a user wrote the word sad, has a higher probability of illness as would be measured by PHQ9 score or by the diagnosis of a clinician. Labeling of this type is generally done for a subset of each corpora or other information for the ground truth. For example, Kramer et al. (2014)’s study that manipulated Facebook News Feed filters (described in Section 3.2) used emotion terms from LIWC. Other emotional thesauri include WordNet (Miller et al. 1990), particularly its extension WordNet-affect (Strapparava and Valitutti 2004) and normative databases such as the Affective Norm for English Words (ANEW) (Bradley and Lang 1999). These thesauri can be used to group words, emotion words, for example, according to their valence or activation (i.e. arousal) (Calvo and Kim 2013).

Behavioral features. When people write they leave a trace of their behaviors. This metalinguistic information includes the time they wrote, for how long, if the writing was reply to another post, etc. The study by Sadilek et al. (2013) using geo-location and twitter data (discussed in Section 3.1) is an example of how this type of data can be used in the modeling of moods.

Social features. These include the number of relationships (e.g. Facebook friends) and the topological map (i.e. who is related with who) that have been found to correlate to emotional and mental health constructs. The study by Sadilek et al. (2013) used social features to model emotional contagion within groups. Others have shown how they can be used to improve the prediction of mental health states (Masuda et al. 2013; Homan et al. 2014).

5.1 Web-based psycho-educational interventions

Psycho-education refers to the educational interventions where patients and their families can learn about the illness and the techniques and resources available to help them. Most examples of psycho-education interventions are fixed (i.e. not personalized) descriptions of symptoms and treatment written for a general audience. Although these have been excluded from this review, we explore here how they could be made adaptive and personalized using NLP. Exploring new approaches is important since research shows that web-based psycho-education interventions have therapeutic value and show positive outcomes (Ritterband et al. 2003). Internet-based interventions (CBT, psychoeducation and other) have shown to be effective in treating depression and anxiety (Spek et al. 2007; Donker et al. 2009), eating disorders (Neve et al. 2010), smoking and alcohol consumption (Bewick et al. 2008; Myung et al. 2009) among other conditions.

Other application domains can provide ideas for innovative approaches in mental health. For example, in the same way that NLP has been used in educational technologies one could expect them to be used in psycho-education. Regrettably this has not been the case. A search on Google Scholar for “NLP psycho-education”, “computational linguistics psycho-education” did not return any positive results. NLP is used in education, for example, in automated assessment tools where users can answer questions and get formative feedback to improve their understanding. In health this could be done to improve their understanding of an illness. The content of websites could also be improved by measuring the complexity of the language used, allowing content editors to adapt the language to different age and socioeconomic groups.

A common marketing strategy is to personalize information with automatically generated text, for example, using simple templates to generate mailouts. Evaluations have shown that this type of semi-automatic and fully-automatic texts (i.e. letter, interventions) compare well with those generated by humans on a number of measures such as tone, rhythm and flow, repetition and terminology (Coch 1996). Within health, personalization has been considered critical to patient-centered care and a number of studies have evaluated Natural language Generation (NLG) techniques in the authoring and personalization of webpages containing patient education materials. Unfortunately, the personalization of materials has been tried only in the context of physical health (e.g. surgical procedures, cancer, etc.). In the context of mental health, personalizing information (i.e. interventions) could also be helpful for family members, moderators of peer-support groups, the general public in social media, etc. Automated text generation methods could provide the moderators with information that they can use for quickly customizing and replying. This may even be useful for mental health clinicians, where information about a specific patient can be presented in the form of a report.

There are several possible tools used to build NLG systems including SimpleNLG (Gatt et al. 2009), a simple Java-based generation framework. The design of these tools is generally informed by the work of Reiter and Dale (2000), who defined a general architecture used in most of the applications we reviewed. The architecture has three components connected together into a pipeline: (1) A Document Planer determines the content and structure of a document. (2) A Microplanner decides how to communicate the content and structure chosen by the Document Planer. This involves choosing words and syntactic structures. (3) Surface Realiser maps the abstract representations used by the Microplanner into an actual text.

One of the few examples of mental health applications is PyschoGen (Dockrey 2007), an NLG-based system that changes its output based on the emotional state (set by the user). The experimental system followed the standard document planning → microplanning → realization pipeline. The goal of the project was not to send the text generated to real users or even generate highly natural output, but rather explore how emotional data could be generated. This type of approach could be suitable for mental health interventions that express empathy and compassion in line with the concept of client-centric health information and resources. Since there is little research on NLG applications to mental health, we describe here some related to physical health.

“Information Therapy (DiMarco et al. 2007) is a system providing preoperative information, that largely consists of personalizing resources that are normally distributed via brochures – each discussing a surgical procedure. The system was designed using a collection of reusable texts, each annotated with linguistic and formatting information, then the NLG tools automatically selected, assembled and revised the reader-appropriate pieces of text. This approach could easily be adapted to psycho-education interventions.

5.2 Interactive, self-guided interventions

While content in tailored information systems is directed one-way – from the system to the user – similar techniques can be used to produce interactive psychoeducation interventions. This includes interactive software (websites, mobile apps, SMS) that offer an individualized step-by-step structure of information and guidance - a form of online self-help activity. The interactive system may provide a form of education as in the previous category, but may also only provide a structured set of activities for the user to complete. Back in the 1960s, a system called Eliza (Weizenbaum << FOUND SOMETHING LIKE THIS ONLINE FROM AN AUSTRALIAN ORGANIZATION, SO CONCEPT ISN’T NEW BUT CONTENT IS THE ISSUE. 1966) was one of the first AI systems for this type of intervention. It emulated a Rogerian psychological perspective and used an early form of AI to engage the user in a dialogue of question and answer and asked empathic questions, based on the previous dialogue move. There has been some research around this model, where a software agent plays the role of the therapist (Bohannon 2015).

Structured interventions such as Computerized Cognitive Behavior Therapy (CCBT) have received the most attention over the last twenty years. Although we could not find any CCBT interventions utilizing NLG, positive results from their application in related areas (Barak et al. 2008) make them a prime candidate for future research. For example, the efficacy of Moodgym (Christensen, Griffiths and Jorm 2004), one of the pioneering tools for online CBT, showed that it was effective in reducing depression and dysfunctional thinking and in increasing understanding about CBT techniques. Since then many other CBT-based interventions have been developed and evaluated for the treatment of different mental health problems (Barak and Grohol 2011). Enough evidence for the effectiveness of online CBT has now been accumulated that in the UK computerized CBT is included in the public healthcare coverage (Kaltenthaler et al. 2006) and the market of commercial applications is booming (Aguilera and Muench 2012). NLP techniques could possibly be used to personalize the activities or to automatically process personal diaries. A limitation of current CBT interventions that could be addressed with NLG systems is that they can only help when the user proactively goes to the website or installs the app. They cannot use any of the information users generate during their everyday life, such as Facebook posts, tweets, emails, etc. The NLP techniques described in Section 4 can be used to gather some of this information from these sources, which could be used to make inferences and generate appropriate interventions to be delivered privately through the same social media.

5.2.1 Relational agents

Relational agents (Bickmore and Picard 2005; Bohannon 2015) are tools where patients have conversations with a computer. The term relational aims to highlight a higher aim than similar conversational agents designed for question-answering or short dialogue situations (e.g. Apple’s Siri). The research used to design relational agents feeds from psychology, sociolinguistics, communication and other behavioral sciences and focuses on how to build long-term relationships. The language used by the agents can vary in sophistication, going from multiple-choice questions, prerecorded texts or spoken language and most often include an NLG component.

Relational agents, and sometimes virtual reality (VR) environments, can interact and ‘speak’ to humans, i.e. they are Natural Language capable. To do this, they must understand spoken, or sometimes, written language, they must be able to manage a dialog (e.g. turn taking) and generate the output text/voice. Generally, the speech signal is converted to text using a speech recognition system, and the speech is generated from text using a text-to-speech system. Although details of this work is beyond the scope of the present discussion, Kenny et al. (2007) provide useful details on the architecture for one of these systems.

For relational systems to work, they have to engage patients and build a good therapist–patient relationship (Okun and Kantrowitz 2014). It is believed that this relationship, and engagement in general, depend on the quality of the agents language, voice, metalinguistic and emotional expressions (e.g. face and body) (Bohannon 2015). Again this is similar to what has been done and evaluated in education. For example, D’Mello et al. (2011) develop affect-aware Intelligent Tutoring Systems, somewhat similar to relational agents, and show that when the system detects and responds to emotions it is better at promoting learning and engagement.

Maintaining engagement with any behavior change tool is challenging, even more so with agents that are expected to be used for a semester, a year or a whole life (Bickmore and Gruber 2010; Bickmore, Schulman and Yin 2010). Although short-term engagement is somewhat easier, it is not necessarily a good predictor of health outcomes (Bickmore et al. 2010). A way to study engagement with interventions involves using personal relationship research (Bickmore and Picard 2005) and medical psychology in general. Bickmore and Gruber (2010) evaluated a number of systems used in health counseling and behavior change interventions. They found that the agents can be used in CBT interventions, can be engaging and help in behavior change, and they can also reduce cost or facilitate communication when human resources are scarce. The narrative is considered particularly important to the success of the intervention and can be designed to be engaging and possibly educational.

Some virtual agents use novel forms of data to personalize the dialogues. Help4Mood (Martínez-Miranda, Bresó and García-Gómez 2012b) is an interactive virtual agent aiming to help people recover from depression in their own homes. It uses subjective assessments, standard mood and depression questionnaires and diaries to personalize the conversations. An interesting feature of Help4Mood is that it also tracks aspects of behavior such as sleep and activity levels that can be used to shape the conversations. It is designed for use with other forms of counseling and therapy and the information collected can be provided to therapists.

Factors that influence the quality of relationships with an agent include the User Interface (Bickmore and Mauer 2006). For example, a text avatar (Rincón-Nigro and Deng 2013), similar to a chatbox, would have different qualities than an embodied avatar. Some form of empathy in the avatar has been recognized as important and incorporated in several agents (Bickmore, Gruber and Picard 2005; Martínez-Miranda, Bresó and García-Gómez 2012a) 5.4 Online counseling

Technology in this category – often referred as e-therapy – is used to mediate the interactions between patients and clinicians (e.g. Email, Skype) (Grohol 2004) and can replace a face-to-face session. The forms of communication or interaction can be more flexible for counseling and can be asynchronous (e.g. email, forums, etc.) or synchronous (e.g. chat, video conference, etc.). Chatboxes are an interesting form of therapy. As shown by Dowling and Rickwood (2013) in a systematic review of online counseling via chat they can be effective in helping patients. For example, clients using the online chat service have shown positive attitude toward counseling (Finn and Bruce 2008). We could not find any recent study using NLP-enhanced chatboxes, and regard this as an important area that requires further evaluation.

5.5 Online support groups and blogs

Online mental health support groups have become increasingly popular since the late 1990s. They enable people in distress to find others with similar needs and problems, to share feelings and information, receive support, provide advice and develop a sense of community. For example, the feedback received by peer-supporters on social media can help individuals reflect on their thoughts, which offers a type of mental health intervention through the feedback loop (Hoyt and Pasupathi 2008; Grohol 2010). Online peer-support groups are effective in mental health and the degree to which a user engages with the group through posting new messages or replying to others, has shown to relate to the quality of the health outcome (Barak, Boneh, and Dolev-Cohen 2010). The review by Griffiths et al. (2009) focused on measuring the effectiveness of online support groups. They reviewed 31 papers (involving twenty-eight trials) and found that 62.5% reported a positive effect on depressive symptoms, although only 20% used control groups. Regrettably the coding did not include any technical features of the studies, such as use of NLP. Moderator Assistant (Liu et al. 2013), described earlier, provides trained moderators the ability to identify people at risk and to respond with resources (e.g. link to mental health related information). These moderators help keep the community together and raise the value of conversations. Besides the triage system described in Section 5.5.1, Moderator Assistant can also automatically create draft interventions that moderators are expected to edit using NLG techniques (Hussain et al. 2015). These drafts can improve the efficiency and quality of the feedback provided. For example, they can use therapeutic language and focus on issues that reflect the ethos of the organization. If the organization wants to focus on certain illnesses or treatments it can develop specialized content. 5.5.1 Triage systems

Most research has used real data but largely neglected the translation of insights to real-life application of the diagnostic outcome. An understudied area is that of real use triage systems, used ‘in the wild,’ where individuals considered ‘at risk’ are identified in order to receive some form of assistance. We have already discussed studies by Choudhury and others who used Twitter (De Choudhury et al. 2013a) and Facebook (De Choudhury and Counts 2014) data and where recent mothers at risk of depression were identified, yet these studies did not evaluate how those people could be offered assistance, or whether this would even be acceptable.

Another approach is for this type of technology to be used only by people who have been trained to help with mental health issues. For example, “Moderator Assistant” (Liu et al. 2013) is a triage system for moderators at ReachOut.com a mental health organization based in Australia. Some ReachOut.com users seek help by posting in discussion forums that have moderators who read the posts and where appropriate, respond. Their triage system aimed to help prioritize responses by identifying posts that needed urgent response together with information on the topic/issue. For the moderator, this might involve replying to the post, contacting the post author directly, and sometimes removing posts that do not comply with ReachOut.com policies. Given that this is often a complex decision, the triage tool also allows multiple moderators to communicate around a particular post. 5.6 Summary

Text-driven psychological interventions are possibly the most common form of Internet intervention.

NLP techniques are rarely used as part of interventions.

Psycho-educational and self-guided interventions have many similarities to learning technologies where NLP have been widely used. There is an opportunity for one area to learn from experiences in the other.

Relational agents have been increasingly common, often in the form of embodied conversational agents or companions. The increased popularity of chatbots and automated messaging systems will possibly support growth in this line of research. Text messaging, often considered as a low-tech option is very useful, particularly in certain populations.

Online counseling and peer support groups provide human-to-human communication where the computer mediation can add significant value through automatic triaging, summarization and personalization of the interventions.

The review was aimed to provide a taxonomy of how NLP has been used in mental health applications and potential future opportunities for its integration into online mental health tools. This application domain is highly interdisciplinary, with the technical aspects of building systems and the mental health challenges of helping those who most need it. A common problem is that the research literature in one area is often not known to researchers in the other which makes collaboration difficult. In fact, often these collaborations can be hindered by differences in the language, terminology and methodology. We covered three areas in which multidisciplinary teams could collaborate: (1) data collection, (2) processing or diagnosing and (3) generation of automated mental health interventions.

Multidisciplinary teams have used data from Twitter, Facebook, blogs and other social media services to learn about people’s behavior, emotions, social communications and more (Section 3). Most of the research has focused on English language, and more research is needed on other languages, particularly taking into account how cultural factors such as mental health views and stigma may influence the outcomes.

What we called ‘labeling’ (Section 4) encompasses triaging people at risk, the diagnosis of specific mental health conditions and even automatic labeling of suicide letters. There is probably other ways in which information extraction and text classification techniques can be used, but we have limited our discussion to those described in the mental health literature with a focus on depression and suicide. Although the techniques are similar to those used in other application domains, one has to be aware of the differences. For example, while classification accuracy in marketing is important, a false negative (i.e. erroneously not identifying an individual as belonging to a group) in marketing only means an opportunity is lost, while in mental health it could be more serious such as not identifying someone who is in need of help. The trade-offs between precision and recall will likely be different in these applications.

Although there has been great progress in the data collection and processing, there has been insufficient research on the uses of NLG in mental health interventions, with the notable exception being the use of relational agents.

6.1 Research limitations

This review is not an exhaustive compilation of all the work in NLP and mental health. The collaboration between psychologists and computing researchers is rapidly evolving, and new studies at the intersection of these fields are published regularly. For example, a recent special issue of Science Magazine dedicated to progress in AI had several mentions to this area (Bohannon 2015; Hirschberg and Manning 2015; Horvitz and Mulligan 2015).

Because of the character of the data, and the difficulty in maintaining the anonymity of those who write the texts (Horvitz and Mulligan 2015) ethical considerations are crucial. In fact, researchers should be aware of difficulty of applying methods common in computer science such as shared task competitions or data sharing. We have not covered the ethical implications of being able to identify people in need. This is an important area that requires a dedicated article. Once methods are developed to accurately process information data in mental health, a clear area that requires further research is how this information can be relayed sensitively and ethically back to participants.
